## Solid-state NMR and electrochemical dilatometry study of charge storage in supercapacitor with redox ionic liquid electrolyte 氧化还原离子液体电解质对超级电容器中电荷存储的固态NMR和电化学膨胀学研究

> Yanyu Wang, Cédric Malveau, DominicRochefort
> Energy Storage Materials, Volume 20, July 2019, Pages 80-88
> [10.1016/j.ensm.2019.03.023](doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2019.03.023)

### 1. Introduction
Electrochemical capacitors, also known as supercapacitors, have received considerable interest as a charge storage devices due to their distinct advantages such as high power density and long life cycle. [1,2] The storage of electrical energy in electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) relies on the formation of an electrochemical double layer (EDL) at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte. Porous carbons, such as activated carbons, are widely used for supercapacitor electrode materials owing to their high surface area and conductivity [3]. The desolvation of electrolyte ions and the relationship between the carbon pore size and the desolvated ion size have been shown to play important roles on the capacitance [[4], [5], [6], [7]].

The energy stored in supercapacitors is related to the cell capacitance as well as the operating voltage. Room temperature ionic liquids (ILs) are studied as alternatives to organic electrolytes due to their wider electrochemical potential window of operation. This feature is highly desirable in supercapacitors due to the square dependence of the energy density on the voltage [[8], [9], [10]]. ILs have additional favorable properties including low vapor pressure, non-flammability and good thermal stability [11]. Another strategy to enhance energy density is via the introduction of a redox-active additive to the electrolyte [[12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]]. The use of electroactive species such as iodide, hydroquinone, methylene blue or indole-based conjugated macromolecules have been reported for this purpose [[13], [14], [15], [16], [17]]. Most of the redox-active electrolyte supercapacitors are based on aqueous solutions due to the higher solubility of redox species in water than in organic solvents. Aqueous electrolytes however have the downside of being limited to moderate operation voltages. Redox-active ionic liquids (RILs) can overcome the solubility and electrochemical stability limitations of organic and aqueous electrolytes. These electroactive phases are obtained by attaching a redox-active moiety to one or both of the ions of ionic liquids [[22], [23], [24], [25], [26]], and electrochemical characterizations show their potential use in electrochemical devices including supercapacitors. Our group has reported on a supercapacitor using a redox-active electrolyte made from ionic liquids functionalized with electroactive ferrocene [27]. Compared with pure ferrocene dissolved in organic solvent, the concentration of the redox moiety in ferrocene-functionalized ionic liquid is significantly enhanced up to 2.4 M. The operating voltage for the supercapacitor based on this redox ionic liquid reached 2.5 V and an energy density of 13.3 Wh·kg−1 was achieved, which is approximately twice than that with the unmodified ionic liquid (purely EDL charging). More recently, Mourad et al. presented a biredox ionic liquid that is an ionic liquid functionalized with redox-active species on both cation and anion, for application in supercapacitors [28]. They demonstrated that the capacitance has a two-fold improvement and sustains 2000 cycles without deterioration. These examples clearly demonstrate that the redox-active electrolytes in supercapacitors offer increased energy thanks to the faradaic charging arising from the redox-active species.

A number of theoretical and experimental methods have been developed to study charge storage mechanisms in EDLCs. Molecular dynamics simulations can describe various adsorption modes for ions at the microscopic scale using specific model and can be used to explore new route to improve energy storage efficiency [[29], [30], [31], [32]]. In situ experimental methodologies based on electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) [33,34] and infrared spectroscopy (IR) [35] have been used to address questions concerning details of ion behaviour in real devices. EQCM is capable of measuring mass variation of electrodes during charging and discharging process. In situ IR method allows the movement of cations and anions of electrolyte in or from carbon micropores to be tracked upon charging. However, a key limitation of EQCM and IR methods is that the in-pore ions cannot be directly detected. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, including in situ [[36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42]]and ex situ [[43], [44], [45]] approaches, stand out as a particularly powerful tool to study the molecular mechanisms of charge storage by identifying and quantifying ions adsorbed within carbon micropores. This originates from the shift of the resonance frequency of nuclei strongly interacting with the local electronic density of activated carbon; the ring current effect [46]. Both in situ and ex situ NMR studies of supercapacitors with organic electrolytes or ionic liquids have shown that the electrolyte ions are spontaneously adsorbed into the carbon micropores in the absence of an applied voltage and that the ion population within the micropores changes as a voltage is applied. Importantly, the charge storage mechanism can vary significantly when different electrolytes or even identical electrolyte with different concentrations are used. Three possible pathways for charge storage mechanisms in supercapacitors are proposed based on NMR studies of supercapacitors with porous carbon electrodes and organic electrolytes [38,47,48]. One possible mechanism is adsorption of counter-ions, resulting in an overall increase in the population of in-pore ions with a charge opposite to that of the carbon electrode. Alternatively, charging can be driven by desorption of the co-ions, resulting in a surplus of the in-pore counter-ions and a reduction of the total in-pore ion population. Finally, it is possible that the counter-ion adsorption is accompanied by the simultaneous co-ion desorption (referred to as ion-exchange) and the total in-pore ion population remains constant.

Dimensional changes of the carbon electrodes of supercapacitors may play an important role in the overall energy balance of the charging process.50 In situ electrochemical dilatometry has been widely used as a reliable tool to monitor the charge-induced dimensional changes of various carbons such as activated carbon, carbide-derived carbon, carbon nanotubes or graphene in supercapacitors [[49], [50], [51], [52], [53], [54], [55], [56]]. The expansion of the carbon electrodes is related to both the carbon pore size distribution and electrolyte. Studies have shown than that the activated carbon electrodes exhibit a reversible expansion up to a few percent of the initial thickness upon charging [54]. The macroscopic electrode expansion observed by dilatometry could be correlated to a microscopic change in terms of ionic migration. The combination of NMR and electrochemical dilatometry provides a more complete picture of the charging mechanism of supercapacitors.

In this work, the charge storage in a redox-active electrolyte supercapacitor using activated carbon (YP-50F) electrodes and an electroactive ionic liquid electrolyte was studied by ex situ 19F MAS NMR and in situ electrochemical dilatometry. The ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ferrocenylsulfonyl-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide (EMIm FcNTf) was selected due to its high concentration of redox centers, miscibility with many organic solvents and electrochemical stability. The ferrocene redox center linked to the FcNTf anion allows monitoring both the anion inclusion in the carbon from the 19F signal and the amount of faradaic charge by chronocoulometry from a single charging step. First, we look at the spontaneous adsorption of FcNTf in the micropores of the activated carbon in the absence of potential to evaluate the impact of the larger ion size. Then we present the results of the ion quantification in the pores as a function of the voltage applied to a symmetrical supercapacitor cell to provide insights into the charge storage mechanism. We will show how the faradaic contribution of charge storage arising from oxidation of the ferrocene can be determined by subtraction of the EDL ionic charge calculated with the in-pore ion population measured by NMR from the total electronic charge. Then, we complementarily measure the electrode volume change during the charging process using electrochemical dilatometry. The results gathered reveal important information about the difference in charging between EDLCs and redox-active electrolyte supercapacitors, allowing us to propose a charge storage mechanism for this system.

### 2. Materials and methods
## 2.1. Carbon electrode fabrication
Carbon electrodes were fabricated from a slurry consisting of 95 wt % YP-50F activated carbon powder (Kuraray Chemical, Japan) and 5 wt % polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) binder (Sigma-Aldrich, 60 wt % dispersion in water) in ethanol. The slurry was stirred for at least 2 h until a homogeneous consistency was obtained before heating up to 90 °C under stirring. The resulting paste was kneaded thoroughly and rolled to form a free-standing film with a final thickness of approximately 0.2 mm 6 mm diameter disc-shaped electrodes were then cut and dried under vacuum at 120 °C for at least 24 h. For electrochemical dilatometry experiments, the prepared electrodes were placed on a stainless steel grid (Alfa Aesar, 80 mesh, 0.127 mm) used as a current collector and were pressed for 60 s at a pressure of 2 MPa before assembled into the electrochemical dilatometer cell.